Every day there seems to be a different country in the news with a new tragic headline: Nigeria. Ukraine. Afghanistan. Yemen. Myannmar. And of course, Syria.

Rohingya refugees in limbo; forgotten conflicts simmer elsewhere in Myanmar
The sudden exodus of refugees captured the world’s attention, but as the crisis shifts from emergency response to long-term survival, will the focus – and funding – keep pace with the pressing needs on the ground? Can the fragile settlements withstand a significant storm, or even the seasonal monsoon rains that will fall in a few short months? And will the Bangladeshi and Myanmar authorities try to make good on a plan to repatriate Rohingya refugees despite warnings from any number of aid groups, rights monitors, and UN agencies, and a troubling history of less-than-voluntary returns?                                                                                                          
  While Rakhine State smoulders, long-simmering conflicts continue to fly under the radar elsewhere in Myanmar. Clashes between Myanmar’s military and ethnic armed groups in the country’s north have escalated, largely out of the public spotlight. In northern Kachin and Shan states, some 100,000 people have been uprooted since 2011, when a government ceasefire with the Kachin Independence Army collapsed. Roughly 40 percent of these people live in areas outside government control. But Myanmar has also put limits on aid access to areas even under its authority, mirroring the more publicised restrictions in place in Rakhine. Buried somewhere is Myanmar’s long-stalled peace process involving myriad ethnic armed groups operating across the country. A new round of talks is set for later in January. But with only a handful of armed groups on board with a tenuous ceasefire agreement and other key players excluded entirely, a politically negotiated peace remains elusive.

Syria’s sieges and displacement
The Situation: The war in Syria is the worst humanitarian crisis of our time. After nearly four years, more than three million people have fled to safety in neighboring countries, but more than seven million are displaced and still trapped inside the besieged country. Two-thirds of the population is now in need of urgent humanitarian assistance — they have no homes, no jobs, no school, no security, no ability to meet their basic needs.
The insecurity and conflict in neighboring Iraq has blurred the lines of war, creating new and unpredictable risks at every turn. In all, such massive displacement of both Syrians and Iraqis, and unpredictable violence, threatens to destabilize the entire region.
Severe winter storms are the most recent threat, with snow and freezing rain putting families without warm clothes or proper shelter at risk.
There’s talk of reconstruction where the fighting has fizzled out, be it in areas brought under the government’s control or in cities like Raqqa, which is now controlled by Kurdish forces but has a mixed population that is beginning to come home, to utter destruction.
Investors are lining up for a slice of the rebuilding pie. But an average of 6,550 Syrians were displaced by violence each day in 2017. So what of the 6.1 million and counting displaced inside Syria – many sheltering in tents or unfinished buildings and facing another long winter – not to mention the 5.5 million refugees abroad? Will they have a say in how Syria is rebuilt? With reconstruction already a major bone of contention in peace talks and the EU planning to get involved in 2018, how this plays out is important and worth watching.

Boko Haram Crises in Nigeria
The conflict in Nigeria’s north-east has resulted in widespread displacement, violations of international humanitarian and human rights law, protection risks and a deepening humanitarian crisis. Now in its ninth year, the crisis shows no sign of abating and is adding to the long history of marginalization and chronic under-development as well as a higher rate of poverty, illiteracy and unemployment. Since the start of the conflict in 2009, more than 20,000 people have been killed, thousands of women and girls abducted and children drafted as so-called "suicide" bombers into the insurgency.  Up to 2.1 million people fled their homes at the height of the conflict, 1.7 million of whom are still currently internally displaced and close to 200, 000 people are still in Cameroon, Chad and Niger, after having been forced to flee. 
 
In the three most affected states of Borno, Adamawa and Yobe, 7.7 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance, more than 50 per cent of whom are children. Government forces are recapturing territory from the insurgents, but the security situation in the north-east is expected to remain fragile.  Over 80 per cent of Borno State is considered high or very high risk for international humanitarian actors, often constraining access to desperately vulnerable communities.  As the security situation improves, new areas are becoming accessible and new dimensions of need -- and hope -- emerge.
 
In areas recently retaken by the Government vulnerable host populations are in critical need of humanitarian interventions including food, water, sanitation, protection, education, shelter and health services. Escaping from attacks across the three most-affected states, IDPs are taking shelter in the relative safety of urban centres. Families are living in overcrowded and highly inadequate living conditions, with resources and basic services under huge strain. Maiduguri, the capital of Borno State, and its outskirts, have seen their population double from one to two million with the influx of people fleeing the violence in other areas of the state.  In an area already economically deprived, more than three in four IDPs are living among host communities.  Their lack of access to livelihoods and resources is leading to risky livelihood coping strategies.
 
